# Firefly (2002) by Deena Larsen: an analysis

## OBJECT DESCRIPTION
[Firefly: a tale told in 180 degrees of separation](https://the-next.eliterature.org/works/369/0/0/) is a hypertextual poetry made of six stanzas, each of them being five lines long. The user can change the order of the lines, creating new and numerous possible stanzas and relative interpretations. 
It was published in two sections of the ELO website: [The Deena Larsen Collection](https://the-next.eliterature.org/collections/20) and in the 11th Volume of the Online Journal [Poems That GO](https://the-next.eliterature.org/collections/14). Even if the accessibility from the personal collection breaks a little the rules set for the creation of my dataset, I got to know her work from the Online Journal section, so I’ll still consider it as a collaboration between the author and the Poems That Go online journal.

## TEXTUAL MODEL AND MEDIUM
The single lines within the poem cannot be modified. They are independent, small, reusable units, and this classifies them as ***modular*** elements. At the same time, each line on its own could be considered as to be read in a ***linear*** fashion. However, following the description of Deena Larsen, the author herself, the reading of the six stanzas is meant to follow a ***modular experience*** on its own, guided by the ***interactive*** possibilities granted by the hypertextual nature of the text itself. That’s because the reader can combine the different lines in multiple ways, intertwining the various meanings and, in doing so, giving to the text new ways of being interpreted. The only limit is that, for each line, there are only six possible alternatives, reducing significantly the number of combinations possible (even if every line’s alternatives are different).

The ***screen interface*** is divided in two sections. On the right side, there is a static, ***linear text***, which is meant to serve as a manual of instruction, as well as a short CV of the author, followed by the technical requirements necessary for running *Firefly*. On the left side, there is a frame dedicated to the e-literature object itself. After clicking on the [link](https://archive.the-next.eliterature.org/poemsthatgo/preserved/gallery/fall2002/firefly/index.html) found in the ELO website, the left side of the interface loads a short animated movement of the title, which moves as to recollect the movement of the insect itself. Then, the subtitle appears with a dissolvence, like the light of a firefly. Then, the user can click on the *Firefly* text in the lower right part of the frame in order to start the experience. 

From there, there are the different stanzas. Each of them has a different photo as background, conferring to the electronic poetry object the characteristic of a ***multimedia*** product.

## NARRATOLOGY
Doing a narratological analysis (or *close reading*, recalling **Franco Moretti**’s terminology) is not particularly meaningful if done on a text like this, which is an electronic literature object whose functioning is based on the concept of hypertext, one of the emblematic concepts of *distant reading*.

However, since this is a text of poetry, where the meaning of each line can be important, it’s possible to analyse it with at least some of the classical narratological tools. It can be done only on a few of them, since if it was done on all the possible lines, then it would be an almost infinite work. So, just in order to try and make some textual analysis, I’ll just take the default lines and analyse some of their narratological aspects. It may be not philologically appropriate, but since most of the analysis done connects to most of the alternative lines as well, maybe in the end it could have some philological meaning instead.

The ***narrating voice*** is the first singular person. No matter from where the text actually starts: there are multiple lines which refer to the same person (Slowly I slip into; the weight of my knees; wet blades draw me in; evening dew licks me; to my still breath; I hold my finger against; in my breath absence; I do not know how) In the last stanza (or better yet, in one of the possible alternative lines of the first line), even if there is no “I”, “me” or “my”, there is the first plural form (As our silence wears on). In this way, at least once in every stanza there is the first person, either plural or singular, who acts as an ***homodiegetic narrator*** of sorts. The first plural person appears also in one other line (And we wait through), which is another alternative for the first line. So the two lines written in first person plural cannot coexist in the same stanza. This may be done in order to highlight either the ambience or the actions and silences of the “I” and the “he” of the poem. In fact, there’s also a third singular person in several lines as well: (a stem and he crawls; there as if he were home; eons as he signals again; to answer him; his wings trembling, eager; as his dark body flies off).

An element common to all of the alternative lines is the ***narrative time***: the author decided to use the present time in order to create a better harmonization between the different lines’ combination. Also, the present time may be used in order to make the reader breath and live every line. 

Because of the interactiveness of the text and its hypertextuality, the ***pacing*** may vary a lot depending on the different combinations. Generally speaking, there is always some degree of slow pacing, because it was like none of the lines was made to fit perfectly another. So the user and reader always has to do at least some interpretation work in order to connect the different lines.

## QUANTITATIVE GLIMPSE
It’s ***not recommended*** to use this product as the source for a ***quantitative analysis***, and that’s for several reasons.

The ***stanzas*** are ***too short*** to be meaningful for a quantitative analysis, especially if we consider each of them as an individual text to be compared with the other stanzas. Not only is this meaningless in this specific case, but it would produce limited and poor results in all the cases in which the text has not a sufficient length.

Then there’s another, certainly more meaningful way, of considering the text for starting the analysis: unifying all of the stanzas in ***one, whole text***, and list out ***every combination*** possible of the lines in order to make several poems to compare. But even this would be meaningless in this case: if each poem is still made of the same words, combined in the same exact lines, then there wouldn’t be any difference to analyse in the first place. Then, the act itself of comparing the different formed poems would be useless, even without considering the fact that the text wouldn’t still be long enough. 

## CONCLUSION
[Firefly: a tale told in 180 degrees of separation](https://the-next.eliterature.org/works/369/0/0/) makes it possible to ***play with the text***, creating different poems with the same lines, and yet producing different meanings every time. This aspect would be definitely lost during the printing process.

It could work with ***limited*** and not exhaustive results if used for a ***textual analysis***. The single lines can be analysed for sure, but a global comprehension of the text using these tools would be very time consuming (there are at least 30 possible alternatives for each stanza). Without this aspect, the textual analysis will always be either incomplete or a long process.

Something that is really ***impossible*** to do is ***quantitative analysis***, because the text is made of the same exact words and lines. 
